Convert SCP-style URLs (no explicit scheme) into proper SSH URLs (#1061)
cloudposse/atmos: website/docs/cli/commands/vendor/vendor-pull.mdx

      version: "latest"
  ```

## Vendoring from SSH

> This is the most common way to access non-public Git repositories from automated systems because it allows access to private repositories without interactive prompts.

Reviewer: No, this should be the least common and discouraged way of using atmos vendoring. It requires an SSH key to be set up.

Reviewer: While it's easy for local development, it sucks for automation. I think we should encouraging using `GITHUB_TOKEN` instead as it works well for both.

> This is the most common way to access non-public Git repositories from automated systems because it allows access to private repositories without interactive prompts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atmos supports SSH for accessing non-public Git repositories, which is convenient for local development.

:::tip  
In automated systems like GitHub Actions, we recommend sticking with the `https://` scheme for vendoring. Atmos will automatically inject the `GITHUB_TOKEN`.  
:::
```

Atmos will use any installed SSH keys automatically. There are two primary ways to specify an SSH source:

> ### Implicit SSH

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### SCP-style Sources
```

> When no explicit scheme is provided, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atmos supports traditional SCP-style sources, which use a colon to separate the host from the repository, like this:
```

```shell
git::git@github.com:cloudposse/terraform-null-label.git?ref={{.Version}}
```

> Atmos’s rewrites this URL to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atmos rewrites this URL to the following format:
```

```shell
git::ssh://git@github.com/cloudposse/terraform-null-label.git?depth=1&ref={{.Version}}
```

> In this case, Atmos injects a default username ("git").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no username is supplied and the host is `github.com`, Atmos automatically injects the default username `git`.
```

> ### Explicit SSH

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### SSH Scheme
```

> When the SSH scheme is specified explicitly, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the SSH scheme (`ssh://`) is explicitly specified, the URL is used as provided. In this scenario, no rewriting occurs because the URL already includes the explicit `ssh://` scheme. For example:
```

```shell
git::ssh://git@github.com/cloudposse/terraform-null-label.git?ref={{ .Version }}
```

> the URL is used as provided. In this scenario, no rewriting occurs because the URL already includes an explicit `ssh://` schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Important Notes

- A URL like:
  ```shell
  github.com:cloudposse/terraform-null-label.git?ref={{ .Version }}
  ```

>   is **not valid** because go-getter misinterprets **github.com:** as a schema and will error out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is **not valid** because go-getter misinterprets **github.com:** as a schema and will error out. To fix this, add the `git::` prefix to the source.
```

- A URL without any scheme, such as:
  ```shell
  github.com/cloudposse/terraform-null-label.git?ref={{ .Version }}
  ```

>   defaults to HTTPS and triggers Atmos to inject credentials if available.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  defaults to HTTPS and triggers Atmos to inject credentials if available and enabled.
```

## HTTPS Vendoring

> Atmos supports vendoring components using HTTPS links. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atmos supports vendoring components using HTTPS URLs. 
```

Reviewer: Links are what people click on.

For example:
```
github.com/cloudposse/terraform-null-label.git?ref={{ .Version }}
```
is automatically resolved as:
```
git::https://github.com/cloudposse/terraform-null-label.git?depth=1&ref={{ .Version }}
```

## Authentication & Token Usage for HTTPS

Atmos prioritizes authentication credentials based on predefined environment variables. The priority order for each provider is:

### GitHub

> | Environment Variable           | Purpose                                                                                                  |
> |--------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
> | ATMOS_GITHUB_TOKEN             | Bearer token for GitHub API requests, enabling authentication for private repositories and higher rate limits. |
> | GITHUB_TOKEN                   | Used as a fallback if ATMOS_GITHUB_TOKEN is not set.                                                    |

Reviewer: Please use definition lists instead of tables. Older documentation that we haven't updated still uses tables.

```suggestion
<dl>
  <dt>`ATMOS_GITHUB_TOKEN`</dt>
  <dd>
    Bearer token for GitHub API requests, enabling authentication for private repositories and higher rate limits. The `ATMOS_GITHUB_TOKEN` takes precedence over the `GITHUB_TOKEN`.
    
    <dt>Default Username</dt>
    <dd>`x-access-token`</dd>
  </dd>
  <dt>`GITHUB_TOKEN`</dt>
  <dd>Used as a fallback if `ATMOS_GITHUB_TOKEN` is not set.</dd>
</dl>
```

> **Default Username for HTTPS:** `"x-access-token"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Bitbucket
| Environment Variable            | Purpose                                                                                              |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ATMOS_BITBUCKET_TOKEN           | Bitbucket app password for API requests; used to avoid rate limits. When both ATMOS_BITBUCKET_TOKEN and BITBUCKET_TOKEN are defined, the former prevails. |
| BITBUCKET_TOKEN                 | Used as a fallback when ATMOS_BITBUCKET_TOKEN is not set.                                           |
| ATMOS_BITBUCKET_USERNAME        | Bitbucket username for authentication. Takes precedence over BITBUCKET_USERNAME.                    |
| BITBUCKET_USERNAME              | Used as a fallback when ATMOS_BITBUCKET_USERNAME is not set. Bitbucket requires a valid username and does not accept dummy values like `"x-access-token"`. |

**Default Username for HTTPS:** 
- If `ATMOS_BITBUCKET_USERNAME` is set, it is used.
- Otherwise, if `BITBUCKET_USERNAME` is set, it is used.

> - If neither is set, `"x-token-auth"` is used.

Reviewer: Rewrite to definition list.

Author: Done

### GitLab
| Environment Variable            | Purpose                                                                                              |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ATMOS_GITLAB_TOKEN              | Personal Access Token (PAT) for GitLab authentication. Takes precedence over GITLAB_TOKEN.           |
| GITLAB_TOKEN                    | Used as a fallback if ATMOS_GITLAB_TOKEN is not set.                                                 |

> 

Reviewer: Rewrite to definition list.

Author: done

**Default Username for HTTPS:** `"oauth2"`

> ## How HTTPS URLs Are Resolved

Reviewer: We also discuss SCP which is not HTTPs

```suggestion
## How Git URLs Are Resolved
```

> When resolving HTTPS-based sources, Atmos follows these rules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When resolving Git sources, Atmos follows these rules:
```

> 1. If a **full HTTPS URL** is provided (`git::https://github.com/...`), it is used as-is. No token data is added to the link even if it is set in respective environment variables. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If a **full HTTPS URL** is provided (`git::https://github.com/...`), it is used as-is. No token data is injected, even if environment variables are set.
```

> 2. If a **repository name** is provided without a scheme (`github.com/org/repo.git`), it defaults to `https://`, in this case if set the token is injected into the URL.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. If a **repository name** is provided without a scheme (`github.com/org/repo.git`), it defaults to `https://`, and if a token is set, it is injected into the URL.
```

> 3. If a **username and repo name** are provided in SCP format (`git@github.com:org/repo.git`), it is rewritten to an SSH URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If a **username and repository name** are provided in SCP format (`git@github.com:org/repo.git`), it is rewritten as an SSH URL.
```

:::note
For more details on configuration, refer to [Atmos Configuration](/cli/configuration).

>  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
